All right, so in the last lesson, we taught our program, how to retrieve the address attached to
a person when we call the find by ID method of the people repository.
And I would say that was pretty straightforward and we didn't run into a whole lot of crazy snafus and
things of that sort.
So in this lesson, I want to stay on this theme and do a little bit of analysis on how that approach
was working and see if we can improve on it.
All right.
So let's jump back over to the people repository, and let's just review what we were doing there for
the loading.
So we wrote some code down here to make use of the address repository to find an address by its idea.
We're extracting that IED from our results set.
So let me just back up again and just say so.
This code here receives the results at which it receives from our KRudd repository, so that's doing
some of the work for us to generate this result set and execute our find by IDs sequel, which I can
hover over right here to let you, you know, get a little reminder of what that was doing, right?
And the whole point is to execute some sequel that's capable of retrieving a person, right in this
case by ID.
Then it gives us the results set for that query.
And then we simply have to go through the results and pull out all of the data from each of the columns
in that query, right?
And we temporarily store that data in these local variables here.
And the last one that we pull out is the home address ID right here.
Then we turn around and we call the address repositories, find my ID method pass in that home address
ID and then we get back an optional address.
So if it existed, then the optional will be filled in with that address.
Otherwise, the optional will be empty and then we can just set that on the person and then return the
person.
So pretty straightforward.
So now I want to do a little consideration of of this approach, though, so I would say this works
well and it was pretty easy to implement.
We didn't have to do a whole lot of work.
We got some work done for us for free by virtue of the fact that we are extending the credit repository.
All we really needed to do was to revise our find by IDs sequel here to add in the home address field.
And then we also needed to create a find by ID query for the address repository to be able to go retrieve
addresses by ID as well.
And it it's pretty easy and straightforward, but what if we wanted to be able to retrieve not one person
with their address, but tens, hundreds, thousands, maybe even millions of people with their addresses
attached?
What would be the ramifications of doing that with this approach?
So one thing to be mindful of with this approach is that for every person that we retrieve from the
database and additional SQL query has to be executed to retrieve their address as well.
So there will be two SQL queries and two round trips from our Java code to the database and back again
for every person that we retrieve via this approach.
When you're only getting one or a handful of people from the database with this approach, not a big
deal, but like I said, if you're getting hundreds or thousands or even millions of people with this
approach, that means that you will now have doubled the number of queries to the database because of
these addresses and making external calls from Java code to other systems like databases and things
is and is considered an extremely expensive operation to do so.
Needing to do it twice is not the best when multiplied times many, many people to retrieve.
So in this lesson, I want to show you a potentially more efficient way that we could accomplish the
same thing, but without having to take the hit of querying the database and additional time for each
address.
So let's jump over to our spreadsheet so that I can show you visually what we're going to be doing.
All right.
So here we are back in the spreadsheet and I've got this depiction.
I think we took a very brief look at this in the last lesson, but now we'll go a little bit deeper
with it.
So I've got here a really, really simplified depiction of our people table in blue.
And then the addresses table here in green, OK?
And you already know how this works, right?
Each person record is capable of pointing to a record in the addresses table, and those references
would be these numbers here with which are called foreign keys.
So the 300 here is referring to line 300 over here in the address table, which means that Gerry Smith
lives at nine eight seven six Fountain Lane.
This person here, Frank Jones.
Lives at 200, which is five, six, seven eight Walden Street.
This person, Larry Kim, does not have an address on record and therefore this value is null, OK?
And so each time we retrieve a person in our code, currently we get that person.
Then we inspect this value.
Then we make a separate SQL call to back to the database to go find the address with that ID.
Then we retrieve that.
Then we reconstitute all of this back into Java objects.
We put the address object inside of the people object, and then we return the person object with the
address inside.
Right, that's what we're currently doing.
However, all relational databases actually give us a mechanism where we can basically join or combine
one or more tables together when we query for data out of them.
And when we do so, it basically makes it look as though you've got one table with all of the data that
you're looking for.
So I've depicted what that could look like down here in red.
So basically, all I've done here is to simply combine all of the columns that I have up here and people
table and all of the columns that I have in the addresses table all into one, right?
So we've got the IDs of the people, the last name, first name, etc. And then these IDs here.
And so it is possible to do a special type of query, which is called a joint query, which will give
us results that will appear to be coming from just one table in effect.
Now let me be clear, when we perform a joint query, we're not actually making a new table.
That's not the result of a joint.
You're not making a new table per say.
You're just making.
The results of the query seem as though they might have come from one table.
OK, so you're effectively making like a virtual table, if you will.
OK.
And so that's what the results would look like.
Now there are several types of queries that can be done with relational databases, and the most useful
one for our purposes right now is called a left outer join.
And the reason it's called a left outer join is because of the semantics of how it works.
And let me just show you it's pretty simple.
So we've got the people table on the left here and then we've got the addresses table on the right.
And currently the way our code is devised is that we always want to be able to get the people that we're
looking for in our code.
Those people may or may not have a reference to an address.
OK.
So address is not the main thing that we're after in the current set of tests that we're working with
in our program, people is the main thing that we're working on.
People are the main concept that we're interested in, and because of that, we want to ensure that
regardless of whether or not a person has an address, we always retrieve the people.
So in that case, we can join these two tables together using a left outer join.
And all that's going to ensure is that whether or not there's an address for a person, we will always
get back to the person.
So down here, let me show you what that really looks like.
So for the people who do have a home address to refer to, it's pretty straightforward.
You've got Jerry Smith here and then his address columns all on one virtual row, if you will.
And the same goes for Frank and Ann.
But then when we get here to Larry Kim, Larry does not have any reference to a home address, and so
his home address columns are just going to be null.
There are other types of joins where this might not be the case, and we will take a look at some of
those other types of joins a little bit later.
There are joints that could do the opposite of what we're seeing here, where you wouldn't see Larry
Kim if he didn't have an address or you'd see all the addresses, whether or not there was a person
to associated with them things of that sort.
All right.
So then the question is, well, how do we actually do this right?
So now let's jump into Squirrel Sequel Client and see how we can perform these joints.
All right.
So here we are back in Squirrel and I'm going to reconnect to our people database.
And jump over here to our school tab.
So let's just learn how to execute a joint.
So we'll start off by simply doing a regular old select everything from people.
But of course, we don't want to actually retrieve everything, right?
So maybe we'll limit this, but to maybe the first 10 records or so, so we'll do a thatch first.
10 grows only.
All right.
So let's execute that.
So there's the first ten rows, and that's just the people, right?
So that's all we're getting here and notice that there are no address references here.
Those are all null.
We only have one record in the entire database right now that actually refers to a real address.
And in fact, here we can go ahead and just retrieve that as well.
Select everything from people where home underscore address equals fraud because I just happen to remember
that was the value there.
All right.
So there's the one guy that we entered into the database from one of our J unit tests, and he does
have a home address of four.
And, you know, while we're at it, let's go ahead and query all the records from the addresses table
as well.
All right.
And there's only the one currently.
OK.
So there's all of that.
So now if we want to do a select query and join the columns from the people table to the columns in
the addresses table, we can do that with an additional clause in one of our select queries and can
do something like select everything from people.
Now, when we are joining multiple tables together, it is very common to make use of something called
table aliases.
And that's where we can simply give our tables and additional name or alias that we can use to refer
to those individual tables columns.
The reason for this is because when you're joining two or more tables together, some of the columns
of those tables may have the same names.
So, for example, over here are people table has an ID column, so does our addresses table.
So if you wanted to be able to retrieve various information from either of those particular columns,
how could you specify which ID column you're talking about?
The people one or the addresses one?
Well, you can prefix the ID column of either of these tables with an alias.
OK.
So let me show you what that would look like.
So we can say select everything from people as P or I could even write it out as people.
It doesn't really matter.
Then I can say join addresses as.
Address, for example.
And then I can say on.
And this is where I specify what the relationship is like, what is it that these two tables may have
in common?
And so if we jump over here, you can see that what they have in common are these IDs here, right?
These home address foreign keys are really just IDs into the addresses table.
So what we can say is essentially join these two tables on the people that home address values being
equal to the address that ID values, right?
And you can almost think of the ocean as another where clause.
So it almost makes more sense in my head when I think where the people that home address is equal to
the addresses that IDs.
That's really what I'm thinking in my head when I look at these join clauses.
All right.
So then we can say on people that home address equal.
To address Dot ID, OK.
So let's run that and see what we end up with.
All right.
So when you first look at it, it looks like all it did was just return the one person who has a foreign
key pointing to an address.
However, if you notice we can scroll much farther now and look at what you start getting there.
It's one result set row that's combining all of the columns of the people table with all the columns
of the address table for this one person.
OK.
And so it kind of looks like it all came from one big, massive table.
Right now, you may be wondering why did we only get one row because we didn't say anything like where
home address equals four or something like that.
So why did we only get one row?
Well, the reason we only got one row in this particular case is because of the type of joint that is
executing here.
And this particular, joined by default, is what's known as an inner join.
And basically, all an inner join is is that there has to be a match that satisfies this expression
here on both tables.
In order for a result set to be returned.
And so since there's only one record in the people table that has a foreign key that points to an address,
and there's only one address that is being used by the people table, we only got back one result set
in this particular case.
OK.
So that's a very, very basic join that we are able to do.
However, what if we wanted to be able to retrieve any or all people, whether or not they have a home
address specified?
And in fact, for our purposes in our code, that's exactly what we're going to need because when we
find a person by ID, they might have an address and they might not.
We don't want them to not show up just because they did not have an address, right?
So to make that work, that's where we have to perform the left outer join right so that we can make
sure that regardless of whether or not there's an address being pointed to.
We always get back all of the people that we're looking for.
So to do that, all we have to do is specify that we want a left outer join.
So by default, if you only say join here, you're getting an enter, join OK.
But if you want to left outer join, then you can simply add in left outer, join just like that.
Now, if I go ahead and execute this as is, in fact, you know, I can go ahead and execute this as
is.
So let's see what we get.
All right.
So now we're getting back the first 100 rows of our database now.
The fact that we're being limited currently to the first 100 rows.
That's not because of the H2 database or our SQL query.
That's just the Squirrel sequel client protecting us from our own potential stupidity.
It's just saying, Hey, you can't possibly actually want to retrieve all five million records.
So how about I just give you the first 100 and we call it a day?
So that's the client is protecting us.
Which reminds me we may want to implement something like this limiting here back in our own find all
method in our code at some later point in time for precisely the exact same reasons.
OK.
So at any rate, it's returning back the first 100 rows of the people.
However, if we scroll to the right, you'll see here that it also is including all of the address columns
now, even though the values are all null because we don't have any addresses actually corresponding
to any of these people.
Right.
Or rather, the people themselves are not referring to any addresses in the address table either, right?
So all of those values are null, but we are getting back their columns.
OK.
So what if we wanted now to use the left outer join?
But instead of retrieving everything, we can be specific with which person we want by ID, right?
Because that's the query that we're actually going to need.
So if we jump over to what was it this tab here for this one person, let's get this person's ID.
So there it is right here.
So I'm going to click on that and copy that ID.
And now what we can do is add on to our query here.
So we can say on people home address equals address that ID where people dot ID equals and then we can
just paste in that ID.
So let's run that and see what we get.
Look at that.
All right.
So looks like we got the one person and and we got all of their additional address columns, too.
OK, so that's how we can do that.
Now, we could have been a little more explicit in our select query here and specified actual column
names as well.
I don't think I want to go through all of this, but let me just show you quickly what that would look
like.
Now for this, just so I can spare myself a little bit of typing, I am going to change these aliases
to be shorter.
So instead of people, I'll just say P. And instead of addresses, I'll say a.
So I will change that here.
And here.
And here, let me make sure let me make sure I didn't break anything.
OK, so that's still working, OK?
So then I can come over here and now I can say he died.
First name, comma p.
Last name.
Comma, and then I'm going to skip over to the address dot street address, comma, a dot city, and
maybe that's enough for right now, so let's run that and see.
OK, so you see what I've done here.
I've just said only give me the first name, last name, street address and city.
It still looks like it's all coming from one table, but I'm really joining across two different tables,
right?
And so that's how you can get really specific with what columns you're actually trying to retrieve.
OK, so hopefully now you have a basic understanding of how we can perform a left outer join.
And let me just remind you that we're doing the left outer join so that we can make sure that regardless
of whether or not there is an address for a person, we still retrieve the person.
OK.
Oh, and one more thing now.
Let me go back to the inner join while also specifying the idea of a person just so I can show you what
would happen with an inner join.
OK?
So if I take this query back to just being an inner join and I give it the idea of a record that I know
doesn't have an address or doesn't point to an address like one, for example, let's see what we get
now.
We get nothing back for the results set, right?
Because with an inner join both sides of the table.
In this case, it's a two table join.
You could, by the way, you could join the multiple tables.
You can even do a join to one table.
So one table can join back to itself, which is kind of interesting.
We might take a look at what that would look like later, possibly.
But anyway, with an inner join the two or more tables that we are.
Enter joining to have to have data in common.
And in this case, we have.
We do have a record for the people side, but we don't have a record for the address side and therefore
you get nothing.
So it's really doing an intersection of the two tables, right?
And if you don't have anything in common between the two tables, then you get nothing at all.
All right.
So I'm going to undo that now, but that back.
And so now we're ready to jump into the Java code and see how we can make use of this over there.
All right.
So back over here in the people repository class, let's take a look at our find by IDs school that
we're currently using.
So it's right here.
So first thing I think I want to do is convert this to use a text block because it's about to get a
little bit longer now.
So I'm just going to add a couple more question marks here and then put this on its own line like so
and maybe I will even put the individual columns on their own lines and input the from part on its own
line.
And maybe the where clause on its own line as well.
Okay, so select all of these columns from people where ID equals blah blah blah.
So now let's see if we can just convert this to use a left outer join query and see how our code needs
to change to still do the same thing without breaking any of our tests, right?
So we can continue to query for these columns here.
However, now we're going to get this from people, so let's go ahead and introduce an alias now.
So from people as P and so then I'm going to want to prepend each of these column names with that p,
and I'm going to use a multi cursor here.
So holding down on option or alt plus the shift key, I'm going to have multiple cursors in front of
each of these bits so that I can do so that I can add the P to all of these all at once.
So p dot just like that.
Then escape to get out of that mode.
All right.
From people aspe and then I'm going to add a left outer join addresses as a on peaked home address equal
to a dot IED.
So join on the home addresses equaling the address IDs, right?
And then let's include the address fields.
So I think I'm going to just put those on their own line as well a date ID comma, a dot street.
Address a dot.
Address two comma, a dot city, comma, a dot state comrade post code, comma, a Dot Co., comma,
a dot region, comma, a dot country.
And I don't know if I got them all in the right order, but the order doesn't really matter at this
point.
You'll see why in a in a moment here.
So we've got all of the address columns there.
And by the way, let me show you this.
Also, this is something that's kind of convenient to do sometimes.
You can actually just grab all of this text right here.
Jump over to a sequel client pasted all in just like this and then try it out.
So I will grab that I.D. paste that right there.
Maybe I will clean up my.
Formatting a little bit there.
Let's try that out.
OK, so let's see.
Ambiguous column name I.D. R C And that's why it's never a bad idea when you start to write these bigger
queries and embed them in your code to copy them and paste them into a SQL client and try them out first,
because it's easier to figure out the bugs here than it is in code after you've run everything right?
So my problem is I forgot to prepend this ID here with a p dot.
That's the problem.
Okay, so let's try that again.
There we go.
OK, so now I know that this is good.
And so I need to fix that right here.
P Dot.
There we go.
All right.
So there's the new query.
So now I can come down here to where we extract the entity from the results set right here.
And now what I can do is I can really just keep extracting more from this result set because now within
this result set, not only do I have this home address ID here, but I actually have all of the columns
of the address as well.
Now I'm going to save myself a little bit of time and jump over to the address repository because over
here I actually already have all the code that I need right here.
And so I'm going to really just copy all of this.
Just like so and then I will jump back over here, and I think I'm going to start off by just pasting
it right here.
So let's just paste all of that in, and then I'm going to change those variables name from ID to address
ID just to make it a little more clear what it is.
Shift F six.
Address and I'm not going to write it all out, but ADR ID.
OK.
Like so.
And then I'm also going to go ahead now and take all of that and extract out a method, because that's
starting to be a lot of code inside a one method.
And I'm not a big fan of doing that.
So all I need to do is to select all of that and then do an option command M or a what is it?
Control alt m and I will just say extract address like so now that didn't quite do what I wanted it
to because I would have wanted it to return the address.
But that's OK.
I can.
I can do that.
So I will just say return address like so and then it's going to complain because my signature says
that I don't return anything currently, but I can just do an option return and tell the ADC to change
the return type to address.
There we go.
So the editing address there and then I can capture this address here.
Sure, I will call that address.
So now I no longer need to call the address repository to retrieve and address by ID.
I'm actually just getting it with the one and only find my ID sequel.
OK?
You see what we're doing here so I can get rid of this line 80.
And now I can just set this address right here instead.
And keep in mind that this set home address method takes this irregular address, but internally it
will wrap this address inside of an optional.
OK, so that's being taken care of for us in this particular case.
All right.
So now we're ready to jump back over to our tests, and I think first off, I just want to run just
this can find person by ID with an address test by itself.
Very good.
So that still works, and I can guarantee you, and I wish I had been paying attention to the timing
on this, but I can guarantee you that this is now executing faster than it was before, when we were
having to make two separate sequel calls.
Now, of course, in both cases, we're talking milliseconds here, but those milliseconds can really
add up when you multiply them times, making multiple calls to retrieve a person.
All right.
So we got that working and we're going to go ahead and end this lesson here.
But in the next lesson, we're going to rain on our own parade again by running all the tests again,
because they're going to be some more considerations that we need to make with a change like the one
that we just did.
OK.
But hey, this is this is great.
We have now enabled at least this one use case to operate potentially almost twice as quickly as it
was before, because it can now make half the number of SQL queries to the database as it was before.
So let's close this one out and I'll see you in the next one.